---
title: Choosing a Development Stack
---

One of the biggest challenges that I've faced so far as a developer is choosing a stack to learn and develop in when starting out. Whoever I went to for advice had a completely different opinion or point of view. It was no surprise though, owing to the variety of languages, frameworks and development tools out there.<read-more> Most developers evangelize the tech that they use, which is why Google won't give you a precise answer either. Ultimately it's up to you to figure it out on your own. You could always follow your heart, take the advice of your inner conscience or just choose randomly. But if you do like to reason with yourself before you decide, here are a few factors which you might want to consider.

The stack you choose is going to have quite some learning curve and might stick with you for a good few years if not for life. Hence, heed me when I say this - you don't ever want to choose a stack randomly. Now, before you choose a stack, you should make sure you know most of your options, if not all. Make a note of the major languages, frameworks and tools in the current market and do a brief research on each of them. The important things you're looking for while researching are:-

- **Maturity:** How long has the tech been around?
- **Compatibility:** Is the tech compatible with your favorite development and hosting platforms (Windows, MacOS, Linux, etc.)?
- **Adaptation:** How widespread is the adaptation of this tech? Is it used more in a corporate environment or tilts more towards the startup culture?
- **Endorsement:** Is the tech well endorsed? Is there some corporation backing it or is it just a popular project by some university students?
- **Community:** How is the support community around the tech? Is it active? Is it easy to access?
- **Learning Curve:** How tough is it to learn? Are there pre-requisites or dependencies that you have to learn first? Are there enough resources to learn from or do you have to rely on the official documentation alone?
- **Future Prospects:** What might you be able to achieve with the stack? Are there enough jobs in the present market around it? Is your startup idea going to benefit from it?
- **Development Type:** What kind of development are you aiming for? Web development? Game development? Certain languages and tools favor development of a certain type.

Other than the above you might look for specific things which interest or concern you. For example, I always prioritize open source and cross platform tools over others. But whatever it is, make sure you're fully satisfied before taking up a stack.

If you're completely new to development, then you are at least an year too early in choosing a stack. The first thing to do is just pick a language (any language) and learn the basics of programming. The most popular beginner friendly language is JavaScript. When you get a hang of programming in general, learn the different programming paradigms and their unique advantages. JavaScript supports both Functional as well as Object Oriented programming. So, you'll be able to put to practice whatever you learn. Practice until you're comfortable writing moderately complex algorithms. You can find a variety of tutorials and algorithm challenges around the web. Only then, you will be ready to choose a stack. Once you have a sound knowledge of programming fundamentals, learning a new language is basically nothing more than learning it's grammar and syntax. If you do decide upon JavaScript as your first language, you should check out [FreeCodeCamp]. They have a great curriculum involving JavaScript which picks you up from ground zero and takes you all the way through to becoming a sound developer. They also have a huge active community which you can turn to for support and motivation.

Depending on the type of development you aim to do, your stack might contain one or more languages and numerous other frameworks and tools required for that specific area of development. For instance, as a web developer, you will probably need to learn and use at least a front end scripting language, a back end scripting language, a markup language, a styling language, pre-processing and pre-compiling tools, a dependency management tool, a database management system, an IDE or a code editor, a live preview tool, a browser inspector tool, a couple frameworks based on your chosen languages, a couple libraries, etc. Then there's Git, which I think is beneficial to almost all developers.

Even after careful considerations, developers still make mistakes in choosing a stack they could be happy with. This results in endless hours of frustration and regret. Sometimes, the developers are left with a useless stack when a tech they selected dies out or is replaced in popularity with a better tech. But, just so you know, that's the life of a developer. Such is the nature of technology that it evolves more rapidly and in ways that nobody can predict beforehand. As a developer, it is essential to keep learning and never be afraid to evolve oneself. Those who are lazy or don't care, either get stuck in the past or are promptly replaced. Some might argue that huge systems built with older technologies can't be replaced quickly and hence developers with knowledge of older tech will always have a place in the tech community. Well, yes, they will, until finding decent developers for that tech becomes a pain in the neck for the company behind such software systems and they finally decide to migrate their code to a newer stack. So, the better option is to always stay updated with the latest tech out there or at least familiarize with them so as to take advantage of any newer features that you might be missing out on.

[FreeCodeCamp]: https://www.freecodecamp.com